1.<<<njlokk>>>
Hello, I have been accepted into these three schools (as well as Georgetown, Cornell and Michigan but I am not strongly considering any of them) and am having a very difficult time choosing. I recently visited Vanderbilt for the fist time and absolutely LOVED it -- I know that if I went there, I would have a fantastic time. Everything about it, from the weather, to the campus, to the girls, to Nashville, is perfect. But honestly, I just don't know if I can turn down the prestige of Penn or Duke simply because of seemingly less important factors such as those. I have this feeling that later in life I may regret choosing Vanderbilt, when it comes to employment/grad school/other opportunities. Am I wrong? Is there anybody on here who would like to convince me that I should in fact choose Vandy?

2.<<<CityEntrepreneur>>>
I'd go to Duke or Penn. If you decide to go to Vanderbilt, it's certainly a well-regarded school, though.

3.<<<bud123>>>
OK I'll give it a shot. First all 3 can get you wherever you want to go. There are only 15 universities ranked in the top 20 USNWR and top 50 AWR and all three are in this elite group. No one from any grad school or job will look down on a degree from these world class universities.
What do students say about these schools? The Princeton Review looks at surveys from current students.
Happiest students: VU ranked # 8, UPENN not ranked, Duke not ranked
Quality of Life score VU 98, UPENN 92, Duke 73 (one of the lowest of any top university)
Academic ranking VU 92, UPENN 92, Duke 90
Interesting professors score VU 92 UPENN 79 DUKE 77
Professors accessible score VU 88, UPENN83, DUKE 74
Best run university VU # 18, UPENN not ranked, DUKE not ranked

Average SAT/ACT scores: VU>UPENN=DUKE
Merit aid: VU>DUKE>UPENN
Town gown relationship VU>UPENN>DUKE
City: Nashville>>>Phili>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>Durham
Happy students make good students so go where you will be happy
You don't have to tell people "no not Penn State I go to UPENN"
Half the country will not celebrate when your basketball team is defeated
And yes you will see more pretty girls in one weekend at Vandy than you will in 4 years at UPENN or DUKE

4.<<<Adelos>>>
It's undergrad. All three will provide essentially the same academic level learning. If you want the name you can go UPENN or Duke, but Vanderbilt isn't far behind and still gaining prestige FAST. Your love for the school environment can determine your academic performance, just keep that in mind as well.

5.<<<Pancaked>>>
I think there is no doubt that Vanderbilt offers the highest quality of life, and also no doubt that Duke and UPenn have better job prospects on average.

I would caution you on making a decision based on job placement. Ultimately, job placement is a lot about who you were able to network with, and not just a function of where you went to school. There are of course Vandy students who end up with better jobs than Duke or UPenn students. Your undergraduate degree is really only going to matter for your very first job anyway. It's the next four years of your life you should be focusing on--a time when you are going to be making friends and memories that will last long after you've quit Job #1. You may go to UPenn and end up in a job you could have just have easily gotten through Vandy-- then what will you be regretting?

6.<<<Faline2>>>
duke and vandy grads parent here--bud123 is right on, plus he really made me laugh out loud re half the country
celebrating when your basketball team loses. I will hold off and not agree with the remark about the lack of pretty girls however in comparison out of the sisterhood with the gals at all 3 fabulous universities.

7.<<<Commodore15>>>
First, congratulations on all three acceptances. Very, very impressive.

A few things to consider:

Prestige does still lean towards Duke and Penn, but this is changing very quickly. Most people with an opinion on the subject consider either Vandy or USC to be the most rapidly improving school in the country. Each incoming class at Vanderbilt over the last four or five years has been more qualified than the one before it. I'm a current junior at Vandy, and would say that there is definitely a perceivable difference in the overall caliber of students in just my year and those of the current graduating senior class. However, even this senior class is far more qualified than those of recent years. It's safe to say that the level of achievement in Vanderbilt's student body has only recently caught up with that of the student bodies at either Duke or Penn. Hence, comparing a student's job opportunities out of Vandy with what they'd get out of Duke or Penn wasn't really fair until very recently, as better opportunities out of Duke or Penn would have largely owed to the students at Duke/Penn just being more qualified.

I think the only area where Duke and Penn have traditionally had an edge is in placement into jobs in investment banking and management consulting, as recruiters in both industries have, in the past, focused their efforts exclusively upon the ivies, Duke, and Stanford. Again, I speak from firsthand experience, and can tell you that this is changing rapidly. Vandy's placement into MBB (McKinsey, Bain, and BCG -- the top three management consulting firms) now vs. what it was even two years ago is a night-and-day comparison (eight current seniors entering Bain alone this year vs. maybe five, in total, entering any one of the three a few years ago). Placement into bulge bracket investment banks has improved even more dramatically. In the current senior class, there are at least two headed to each of the bulge brackets besides UBS. This is the fourth year in a row for which Vandy has been a core school (top three in # of recruits) at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, and it is guaranteed to repeat as a core school next year because BAML just extended 11 summer analyst offers to members of the junior class (might be a record. Summer analyst class size is below 100, so over 10% could be from Vandy). All of that said, I might add that Penn would still give you an edge (and a significant one) if you have been accepted to Wharton. The only school in the country that could rival Wharton for placement into "business" jobs is Harvard, and Wharton's network is still better than Harvard's because there aren't as many Harvard graduates targeting these jobs. Conversely, if you're at Penn but not in Wharton, your opportunities may actually be worse than advertised, as many employers exclusively target Wharton students when they recruit. I realize that this whole paragraph has focused exclusively on investment banking and management consulting -- which probably mean very little to you, still being in high school -- but your opportunities for everything else will unquestionably be very similar at any of the three schools. Networking is where Duke/Penn have the edge, but this edge is far smaller and far less important for jobs in other industries.

Grad school placement should not at all factor into this decision, as it will be similar coming from any of the three. You wouldn't enter business school until several years after you finish your undergraduate career, and at that point your work experience, GMAT, and GPA would be far more important than where you did your undergrad. Law school acceptance is exclusively predicated on your LSAT and your GPA. Medical school acceptance is similar to law school acceptance in that test scores (MCAT) and GPA are huge components, but your research experience is also weighted heavily; fortunately, all three have enormous medical centers and plenty of labs, and make research experience easy to obtain. Placement into Masters/PhD programs in any subject comes down to your GPA, GRE, and research/thesis/recommendations from professors, which shouldn't necessarily differ coming from any of the three.

You really cannot go wrong here. All three schools will leave every door open to you in the future. Also, kudos to you for thinking about this maturely; you'll be successful wherever you end up. Best of luck in making your decision, and congrats again on the acceptances!

8.<<<LHSCary>>>
I can contribute absolutely nothing to the discussion on investment banking but wanted to point out that Bill Bain is a graduate of ... Vanderbilt University :-)

9.<<<Confucious2014>>>
What major is the OP interested in ? If pre-med etc isn't Vandy grade deflation a concern as compared to grade inflation at Duke ( I don't know about inflation/deflation but just parroting what i have read on CC)

10.<<<Commodore15>>>
LHSCary - I'm not completely sure whether your comment is supposed to add to or detract from mine.

You are correct that Bill Bain is a Vanderbilt alumnus. However, I don't think that that's why Vandy's placement into Bain is as good as it is. He graduated back in 1959, yet Vandy's only recently become one of Bain's targets.

11.<<<LHSCary>>>
My comment was flippant--I too doubt Bill Bain has any influence on Vanderbilt being a recruiting target for Bain. I guess I was trying to show that people who are highly successful in business (and also education, medicine, law, politics etc.) have graduated from Vanderbilt over the years; VU doesn't currently have the national reputation of Duke or Penn but it is a very fine school that prepares its students well for med school, law school or business school or for the workforce. The original poster can't go wrong with any of the choices but shouldn't base a decision solely on prestige; comfort/happiness while in school are more likely to lead to better grades and thus a better chance of getting into grad school. Best of luck with your ultimate decision!

12.<<<javalava>>>
If you'd asked me this 2 years ago when I was applying, I would've picked Duke or UPenn, no questions asked. That decision would've been based nearly 100% on college rankings and rumors. That being said, there is no question Duke and UPenn have more diverse programs in A&amp;S, a greater international reputation, ethnic diversity, and more intellectual/nerd culture on campus. Penn also has Wharton, which is infinitely better and more well-connected than the HOD/Managerial Sciences minors at Vanderbilt.

THAT BEING SAID: I'll cut the obligatory comments about great academics, beautiful campus, location, etc.

Here's why I would pick Vandy.

The College Experience- SEC Football. Tailgates. Parties every night, starting on Tuesdays. The most attractive people you have ever seen in your life (this is not a lie or an exaggeration).

Every friend I have who has visited has commented on how well put-together and social the campus is. Vanderbilt will turn a homebody into the life of a party, and force you to learn socializing and networking skills that will take you farther in your career than any class/mock interview ever can. Ultimately, it teaches you to be confident and this is a skill that is far more important for your social life and professional life than you'd think. Personal growth happens outside the classroom. There are so many student organizations and student communities for you to take part of.

In the end, when you're crusty and old, you want to look back on college and remember all the cool things you did and all the cool people you meet. Not all the lonely, anxious Friday nights spent in the library on facebook, messaging people about what they thought the curve on the last calculus exam would be.

You might've made your decision already, but I'm posting this because it's something that I wish I'd have read years ago, when I was making my decision. This is all coming from an Asian, pre-med student who was 100% prejudiced against the South and dreaded going to Vandy senior year.

One final comment: I will also add that the culture on campus is VERY rapidly changing and disappearing, as the college attracts more grade-focused students uninterested in greek life. Our acceptance rate is plummeting, and the academic quality of each incoming class is more terrifying elite than the next, at a rate that far exceeds any other college in the US (except USC maybe). I predict in these 10 years will be the last that a student gets to enjoy the party culture on campus before it disappears. It's just impossible to maintain that kind of dichotomy. So come before it's gone ;)

13.<<<Pancaked>>>
I wouldn't say the culture is very rapidly changing and disappearing. The face of Greek life may slowly be changing as Vandy gets stricter on their behavior, but I don't think we're ever going to see Vandy lose its highly social campus. The Commons and lack of off-campus housing really encourage an active social scene.

14.<<<doubleeternity>>>
I am no believer in rankings, but I do agree that they are meaningful indicators. From the food to the girls, you will find that Vanderbilt is ranked very high in almost all rankings, especially those which use the newest data and methods rather than the reputation of your parents' generation. Here are two of the recent and very revealing rankings. Are you ambitious and driven, or are you going to settle with the crumbling old reputation?

The Top 10 Schools For the Most Ambitious Students
#1 Amherst
#2 Bucknell
#3 Cornell
#4 Davidson
#5 Georgetown
#6 UPenn
#7 Princeton
#8 Rice
#9 Vanderbilt
#10 Wake Forest

Finding a school that will arm you with skills outside the realm of textbooks is rare, and VU does just that.
<url>http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/12/30/the-top-10-schools-for-am_n_802635.html#s216619title=Amherst_College_</url>

The 10 Universities (in the US and UK) With The Most Driven Students

#1 UCLA
#2 Vanderbilt
#3 London School of Economics
#4 University College, London
#5 Stanford
#6 Johns Hopkins
#7 Cambridge
#8 Northwestern
#9 MIT
#10 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

ViewsOnYou, the London based startup sets up profiles for people to help match them with companies and employers that may be a good personality fit. A person on ViewsOnYou is matched with companies using three components  energy (how you work), interpersonal (how you interact), and intelligence (how you think). 23 different metrics  including "drive"  factor into the three categories and are determined for each person from a combination of self-assessment and peer reviews.
<url>http://www.businessinsider.com/universities-driven-students-ucla-2013-12#ixzz2yXZjaCGV</url>

15.<<<pilgrim6>>>
I find it insulting that people on this board frequently rank schools based on girls (for example, the preceding post says "From the food to the girls....") Don't put girls in the same category as food, campus infrastructure, the existence of Greek Life, a strong sports program, academic programs and so on. They are PEOPLE, not things. The more Vanderbilt hopefuls post about and rank the "girl" factor, the less of a reason it is to go there. What girl wants to be constantly judged on her looks for four years?

16.<<<vandyman>>>
pilgrim6, I think the girls comment is meant to be a snide remark about how boys sometimes decide on a college. I agree that it can become annoying rather than funny. But to be fair, I've heard high school girls frequently discuss the "boys" factor when ranking their college preferences. I tend to take this sort of discussion lightly, but I'm old and jaded.

FWIW, I thought my son would care about this factor, but he didn't. He did however care about the social life ("culture"), and is greatly enjoying VU, and all his new friends (of either gender). And to echo something said above, he's extremely driven. He talks about the "work hard, play hard" motto that seems to pervade, and likes that a lot.

17.<<<Commodore15>>>
javalava, very fair points, and I would agree that the social scene at Vanderbilt is really, really unique among top schools. You will not find a social scene nearly as vibrant and thriving until you drop down to USC on the USNews rankings.

Regarding your point about Penn and Duke still holding an edge in terms of "more diverse programs in A&amp;S, a greater international reputation, ethnic diversity, and more intellectual/nerd culture on campus", I would say that I agree to some extent, but that the schools' differences in these regards, at least between Vanderbilt and Duke, are marginal at best. I'll address each separately:
1) Concerning the diversity of programs in A&amp;S, I actually don't know that I agree with your point. Are there certain majors that Penn and Duke sponsor that Vandy does not? Vandy also allows the option of creating one's own concentration, and is similar to Penn in the latter's "One University" policy, which allows undergrads to take classes in any of its schools. I can't think of one thing one would want to study that is offered in A&amp;S at Duke or Penn -- or at any comparable institution's undergraduate curriculum, for that matter -- that is not also available at Vanderbilt.
2) Where greater international reputation is concerned, I agree. However, the difference between Duke and Vandy in this regard is especially negligible. People overseas know that the ivy league, Stanford, MIT, Berkeley, and Caltech are excellent universities. Duke may be well-known because of its basketball, but it's still far from achieving its due recognition, and is much less acclaimed internationally than, say, Cornell -- which it is certainly at least the equal of. Penn beats both by a wide margin in this regard, so if this is important, then neither Vandy nor Duke would be good choices when Penn is also an option.
3) Regarding ethnic diversity and a more intellectual/nerdy culture on campus -- yes, this is where I agree with you most (as in, I think these are the most likely areas where any meaningful difference may exist). However, I again have some reserves about claiming that Duke excels in either of these areas; I am sure that it tops Vandy, but I don't know whether it does so by any significant margin. Furthermore, the OP and any others in similar situations should evaluate the importance of ethnic diversity and intellectualism to them on a personal level. To some, neither is at all important. To others, one or both are extremely important. Both are more about personal preference than anything else. Many students actually find themselves wishing for less intellectualism. One can simply be exposed to enough intellectual thought within classes that the idea of discussing "the history of modern political thought" or something similarly esoteric over lunch, at the gym, and at night with one's roommate while falling asleep is exhausting. It is also conceivable that, for reasons other than bigotry, one might prefer a lower level of ethnic diversity (this is not my preference, however, and I believe that ethnic diversity is a key area where Vandy needs to catch up). A university like Harvard, which is probably the gold standard in student body ethnic diversity, is far ahead of the rest of the world in terms of diversity. The diversity a Harvard graduate experiences in nearly any setting will never compare to what they experienced while in college. There are undoubtedly consequences to this, but because I actually believe ethnic diversity is highly important, and because I do not want to start an argument on the topic, I will not detail them.
I will, however, state that, if Penn and Duke are seen as offering tremendous advantages because of higher ethnic diversity and/or intellectualism, that these same benefits can be had quite easily at Vandy, too. Yes, African Americans may comprise 2% less of the student body at Vanderbilt than they do at Duke (I'm pulling this number out of my ***, but it illustrates a point). It would still be preposterous to think that this impedes one in making friends with African Americans, or in attaining a new perspective through engaging in debates or discussions with African Americans. Intellectualism/nerdiness is not at all hard to find at Vanderbilt. You simply cannot enroll a class of 1600 with an average SAT score of 2250 (or whatever it is) and expect it to not be tremendously nerdy. I do not consider myself a particularly intellectual person, but I have gone deaf in the ears in my nearly three years here from long discussions with friends, hallmates, and professors about random dilemmas concerning ethics, morals, politics, philosophy, science...you name it. Most students here are very intellectual, and if they were significantly more so, I assure you that I would not at all be having a well-rounded college experience.

Essentially, I think that your point about international reputations may be worth a further look, but I don't think that a college decision should hinge on either of the other two. In fact, I think international reputation may also be a bit far removed from the realm of important factors here, since even a degree from Penn will not, on its own, open many doors abroad, and since even attempting to market a degree abroad is still something that a very small number of US graduates do. Additionally, top liberal arts colleges like Williams and Amherst have essentially zero recognition abroad, but many still choose them over Penn, Duke, and Vanderbilt each year.

18.<<<Commodore15>>>
Where these schools really may hold a meaningful edge over Vanderbilt is with respect to their reputations within the US. All three universities are remarkably similar at a high level; they are all mid-sized research universities, with similar incoming undergraduate class profiles.

Penn and Duke have better reputations than Vanderbilt for two reasons:

The first is that Vanderbilt has only recently become a peer of Penn and Duke. While graduating classes from all three are likely at very similar levels of accomplishment now, this was definitely not the case 20 years ago. As a result, Penn and Duke have longer track records of distinguished alumni, which is why Penn and Duke students have an edge in alumni networking. However, this is an edge that should become less and less important as Vanderbilt continues to produce graduating classes of its current caliber. Furthermore, because recent alumni are usually the most helpful when networking, this edge should erode rapidly, as Vandy's recent and soon-to-be graduating classes are by far its most accomplished.

Second, while all three are research universities, Vanderbilt likely has a stronger undergraduate focus than either Duke or Penn. As proof of this, consider that Vanderbilt provides tenure to Professors based primarily upon undergraduate teaching ability. I know of no other tier-1 research university that can also make this claim. This necessarily compromises a research focus, and as research is what brings in fame and prestige, certainly may also compromise recognition, especially vis--vis schools like Penn and Duke. However, as an incoming undergraduate, it might pay to ask oneself whether it is more important that one's Professors be renowned for research, or be renowned for teaching. Yes, having classes taught by a famous Professor is a perk, but I assure you that anyone with a PhD in a subject knows more than enough to teach an undergraduate class in the same subject. What matters far more in a Professor than fame for an undergraduate's learning are qualities like charisma and a genuine interest in instructing students. I've taken two math courses at Vanderbilt taught by a brilliant, renowned European mathematician, but he was hard to understand and I regret having taken both. A lack of research (side note: Vanderbilt does not have a lack of research. Vanderbilt is a top research university in terms of both funding and output; I only mean to suggest that it focuses slightly more on undergraduates and slightly less on research than its peers) is also the primary reason why excellent schools like Williams, Amherst, Swarthmore, etc. -- which offer what many consider the premier undergraduate learning experience, at least in the US -- suffer in renown relative to their research university peers. Superb undergraduate education, however, is also why these top liberal arts colleges are celebrated, despite a lack of "accomplished" faculty.

To summarize everything, I do believe that Penn and Duke will give you an edge. This edge, however, will stem from superior alumni networking opportunities, which will become better and better for Vanderbilt students over just the next few years. Furthermore, this edge is nothing that cannot be overcome by simply being marginally more proactive, and Vanderbilt's opportunities are excellent enough as is that this extra effort may still not be needed. The point at which Vanderbilt's name will catch up to either Penn's or Duke's is years into the future, but many top liberal arts colleges suffer from far less name recognition, so clearly this is something that many are able to overlook when settling upon a school. Furthermore, the social scene at Vanderbilt is unique among top schools, and the undergraduate experience in general is something the school is very committed to.

There is absolutely reason to pick Vanderbilt over either Penn or Duke. However, all three are excellent choices.

19.<<<Commodore15>>>
Also, decisions like this happen all the time. Consider this article:

<url>http://www.insidevandy.com/news/administration/article_d27c4b32-3622-11e3-be58-0019bb30f31a.html</url>

which states:

"Additionally, Vanderbilts overlap in terms of admissions with competitor schools has intensified in recent years. Duke University is still the No. 1 school Vanderbilt competes with to attract freshmen, but Yale has risen from being the No. 21 competitor to the No. 2 competitor, meaning admitted freshmen must increasingly choose between Yale and Vanderbilt. Harvard has risen from No. 10 to No. 3 in terms of overlap."

This was for the Class of 2017, who are currently rising sophomores. Vanderbilt's yield rate (% of admitted students who end up enrolling) was 40.7% for the Class of 2017, which is fairly common for schools in this range (Duke, Penn, Northwestern, Brown, etc). Hence, nearly 41% of all students admitted to Vanderbilt end up enrolling.

Consider that, because they are very similar schools, Duke and Vanderbilt must share an enormous number of cross-admits. In fact, Duke, Vanderbilt, the ivies, and all other top schools share an enormous number of cross admits with one another. If Vanderbilt lost nearly every battle to just its top three competitors in cross-admits -- Duke, Yale, and Harvard -- it would likely have to be winning an unusually large majority from schools like Penn, Dartmouth, Brown, and Northwestern in order to maintain a 41% yield rate. What's more likely is that Vanderbilt is winning a fair share of the admit battles with each of these schools.

Last year, VUceptors (upperclassmen who serve as mentors to groups of freshmen throughout their first semester at Vandy) were given information packets with data on cross-admit statistics, which corroborated some of the above. Vandy's split with schools like Brown and Duke was extremely close -- something between 40/60 and 45/55. It won heavily against Rice and Emory, and lost much more frequently against schools at the very top, like Harvard and Yale. I realize that this information is not made publicly available, so it has to be taken at less than face value. However, the article above should show that Vanderbilt is quite frequently chosen over schools that currently enjoy greater recognition.

20.<<<Commodore15>>>
If you want to be really particular, it's more like Wharton >>>> Duke > Penn >= Vanderbilt.

I just went through the summer analyst recruiting process for investment banking, and am familiar with the undergraduate school representation for incoming analyst and summer analyst classes at most large banks. In general, Wharton probably has 10-15 kids heading to each BB. Duke has 3-4, and Vanderbilt has 2-3 (although it has very lopsided success at BAML, in particular).

A school's past banking alumni will tell you very little about its current recruiting. There's correlation there for sure, in that schools like Harvard and Wharton who have tons of alumni in banking still have great recruiting to this day, but that's not at all a reliable criterion.

21.<<<njlokk>>>
Update: I visited Penn last week, and for various reasons have decided it would not really be a great fit for me.
It's now between Duke and Vandy, and I am still having a really tough time deciding. In terms of what I am interested in studying, I will likely major in International Relations or Political Science, with possibly a minor in Economics. I also have a strong interest in languages (French and Spanish mainly). I know various posters mentioned differences in international recognition; this may be relevant to me, as I would definitely be interested in living/working abroad in the future if possible (ideally in Europe). I don't know if these details would help at all in providing me with advice, but I thought I'd share them in case they do.

22.<<<Faline2>>>
Choosing between Duke and Vandy should be a very tough call. Our Duke son just came home from his five year reunion and talked to me about how much he is still thrilled with Duke and how much it changed his life, how great his classmates are, how wonderful his academics were. Our Vandy son would not have enjoyed it there as much..as it was important to him to explore Nashville and all the area on foot around the Vandy campus which is decidedly more fun town/gown than Duke. I think you have to look at the intangible fit factors for yourself. Also you should be doing some critical thinking on the academic pathway you are most interested in if you are one of the few people who won't change his or her mind in a year. For instance, if you are interested in French or Spanish..look more deeply in the department for their immersion offerings which I am sure are many! There is a diff between a shared academic venture abroad with other universities and a program that is specific to an institution. ie our Vandy son went to Copenhagen and lived with three other men from different colleges doing different things, our Duke son opted for a program in Berlin that was taught only to Duke/Davidson students..and it was much more personal and also more satisfying. Vandy has its own signature programs abroad, as well as shared programs. Take a look at Vandy's program in France and in Spanish speaking cities...you may turn up some fabulous information as a semester abroad is not to be missed no matter where you end up. Vandy has its own program in Washington DC which is really well-run that Vandy son did once. The Gates Foundation at Duke funds tons of vetted out proposals by Duke students that are service related foreign programs. The school of public policy at Duke is pretty sophisticated and there is someone from the state department on campus.

Economics is very rigorous at both schools. Duke has a lot of Econ majors (Duke son was in Econ)...it is one of the lead majors on campus and it is a tough pathway.

The details you share in your last post don't really tell us anything to recommend one school strongly over the other. The social atmospheres of the two universities vary somewhat. Vandy wins hands down in town/gown synergy and location. In my opinion, the student bodies are equally talented and both campuses are simply wonderful with Vandy perhaps winning in terms of residential housing and their two years of residential colleges. Duke has an illustrious history in sports that binds the students together.

Academically, you can make either college sing. I would watch youtube videos re Sanford School of Public Policy at Duke..they have a lot of in house lectures from significant people and they do put each of their majors into internships. One of Vandy son's majors was poli sci with an emphasis on international relations. I think he would comment that many of his classes were small and had discussion options and only a couple were large survey classes. He also spent two summers in Washington DC with the support of his Vandy profs.

good luck with your terrible probelm...:). You should be choosing on your instincts now re your emotional health and on curriculum.

23.<<<Pancaked>>>
@ennisthemenace "I just don't understand why anyone would pick Vandy over Duke"

Perhaps because there is more to a school than rankings? Perhaps an incoming student doesn't want to deal with Durham, wants a fun and interesting college town, wants a competitive football program, wants better weather, a not-hated basketball team, wants a better social life, wants to avoid the Group of 88, etc etc etc.

I don't think anyone is doubting Duke and Penn are more well regarded both nationally and internationally. There is also no doubt that Vanderbilt is on an extreme upswing and its rankings, nationally and internationally, have not yet caught up with the quality of the student body, which is as good or better than that of Penn and Duke (judging by test scores).

24.<<<Rooster10>>>
@njlokk, You did the right thing in going and visiting the campuses. Really it is going to come down to where you feel is a great fit. My only regret is that you didn't go to Vandy over its Rites of Spring Weekend, which is consistently ranked as one of the best College Music Festivals. (If you had I am sure you would have chose Vandy). I was like you and my decision came down to Vandy and Duke, and I chose Vandy. I have never regretted it. There are a lot of Duke grads that I know that seem incredulous that I would choose Vandy over Duke, and that *gasp* I would enjoy myself and become successful. Malcolm Gladwell wrote in his book David and Goliath, and he broke down how college rankings were not a great indicator of future success, and how actually going to an elite college might hinder your dreams because it makes you a small fish in a big pond. The same qualities of work ethic and determination that got you into Vandy and Duke are going to get you a good job regardless of if you studied in Nashville or Durham. I graduated from Vandy, went to Johns Hopkins for my Masters and now work full time with a couple Duke grads. Surprise, we got the same job. We also work with people that went to directional state schools. It comes down to where you feel comfortable because where you are comfortable is where you will do your best. To me, I enjoyed Nashville much more than I enjoyed Durham. I felt like both schools offered me pretty much the exact same experiences, except Vandy offered me more with the city of Nashville.

You mentioned that you are interested in Spanish, and I know I just knocked rankings, but Vandy is consistently ranked #1 for its Spanish program (or at least it was when I went there).

Getting a job internationally does not come down to where you went to school, it comes down to who you know, and if you network really well. I am sure Vandy and Duke both have alumni overseas that can put you in touch with others.

I think it is kinda foolish to judge people on where they chose to go to school because I never know their situation, but just to throw some shade at @ennisthemenace I can never understand why people chose Duke over Vandy. And neither can the research triangle business journal, who said Vandy is the more selective than Duke in the South <url>http://www.bizjournals.com/triangle/news/2011/12/13/duke-is-the-souths-second-most.html</url> (see I can post rankings too that say what I want).

25.<<<oliver007>>>
ennisthemenace....LOL!!! "International Rankings" are the last (first?) refuge of the insecure! You can find many large state school factories listed way above places like Brown, Dartmouth, Williams etc on such lists!!!!!!!!!!!!!! They are absolute drivel and irrelevant to the undergraduate experience. Vanderbilt now out scores both Penn and Duke in the caliber of entering student test performance. The student pool is identical in talent, faculty are excellent at all of them. Vanderbilt offers a much more fun and lively undergrad experience to boot! I'd say there is plenty of reason to pick it above Duke, Penn etc. Of course, the reverse is also equally true. But those who are transfixed by "lists" and so called "prestige" (which is rapidly getting equal) should by all means trudge on to whatever school gratifies their hankering for such a label.

26.<<<oliver007>>>
supernova...OK, look at facts and be prepared to be "very, very, very surprised". I doubt your degree of surprise is relevant to anything being discussed here,

27.<<<makennacompton>>>
Funny how no one yet has remarked on the dorm situtation at Vandy. The Freshmen live in very cramped quarters where they literally put on each other's underwear. It is awful.

Further, as exemplified by the fact that some people here crow about Vanderbilt's presence in the SEC, Vanderbilt is still a heavily SOUTHERN school. If you like that vibe, then fine. Also, it is so off the world radar that Vanderbilt actually has to recruit . . . ASIANS! Who has ever heard of Asians being recruited anywhere?! College applications and colleges in general are geysered with Asians, but not at Vandy. Indeed, it probably the one major school where Asians are actively recruited and where their scores and attributes actually don't disadvantage them. Any school that actually has to recruit Asians to go there (mein Got!) and touts its membership in a conference with Florida, Tennessee and Alabama (academic powerhouses, all . . .) is not yet ready for prime time. That's Vanderbilt. Sorry, it had to be said.

28.<<<oliver007>>>
makennacomp...dude, I got an MD at Duke, so I know Duke. Nice campus...disgusting dorms and rooming situation, not even air conditioned in many cases. The fact that you are indicting Freshman dorms on the Commons at VU renders your other opinions utterly worthless, and lays bare your agenda! You seem to have a spectacularly myopic and addled view of VU, not the least bit burdened by facts. Probably says more about your mind set than it does about VU. Have you been to VU recently..." heavily southern"????? No more so now than is Duke! Get real.

29.<<<makennacompton>>>
[quote]You seem to have a spectacularly myopic and addled view of VU, not the least bit burdened by facts.[/quote]

Ok, I'l bite Oliver, what are the FACTS? You provide none.

Here are my facts: every Asian in my high school was admitted to Vandy, denied by Duke and Penn (Asians apply to every Ivy, don't you know . . .), and accepted to State U. That's a LOT of facts I'm dealing with.

30.<<<bud123>>>
Ennis, your last sentence is why Duke can be so polarizing . There are many reasons for students to select Vany, or Duke, or Penn, or an LAC, or a state flagship........ and the global employability ranking ain't one of them. For the most part Vandy and Duke are 1 percenters in any category one would look at and you are splitting hairs trying to argue between school ranked in the same percentile. The areas where there is a large difference are:
1. Nashville vs Durham......where do you want to live the next 4 years?
2. Quality of life....Vandy students rank their QOL among the best in the nation, Duke students rank their QOL among the lowest of the top 20 U's.
3. Diversity...Duke is more of a global university and it's student body mirrors the population of the world. Vandy is more committed to domestic students and it's population mirrors that of the USA. (neither is better, just different)

maken, I think you may be about 10 years behind the times. It's 2014. Go look up the freshman commons at Vandy and the geographic population of it's students. When you catch up to 2014 please feel free to post an updated note. It's nice for Asian students to know at least one top university will treat them fairly in the application process and Vandy is well represented with Asians students (5% of USA and 9% at Vandy). 15 years ago Duke was the top dog in the Southeast. Today, students should take a look at Vanderbilt and make their own decision.

31.<<<Commodore15>>>
supernova123 - I was surprised to hear that Vandy splits cross admits with Duke and Brown, too. Especially because very marginal differences in reputation tend to translate into huge advantages in cross admit statistics (Duke's dean went on record a few years ago saying Duke beat a group of a few other schools including Cornell and Northwestern something like 75-25 or 80-20). But Vandy's changed rapidly. I also didn't say it was splitting applicants evenly; I said it was something between 40-60 and 45-55. I've heard this from multiple students on campus. Also, consider what I said about Vandy's most common overlaps in terms of cross admits being Duke, then Yale, and then Harvard. I'm going to assume, for obvious reasons, that Harvard and Yale clobber Vandy. But that leaves Duke and many other top schools that Vandy's battling with and, more than likely, winning a good number of battles against. If Vandy's losing to all of its most common cross admit overlaps, it's not going to maintain a respectable yield %. In fact, since it's probably losing nearly everyone to Harvard and Yale (as does every college outside of Princeton, Stanford, and MIT), it has to be making up for these losses with very significant win percentages against other top schools, like Duke and the lower ivies.

On the topic of international recognition, Vandy is definitely less well regarded than either Penn or Duke. However, Duke is not significantly well regarded either (Penn may be, but mostly because it's a member of the ivy league and because Wharton itself is so famous). The fact of the matter is that there are maybe 7 or 8 schools that will give you prestige that is recognized globally. They are Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Stanford, MIT, Cambridge, Oxford, and perhaps UC Berkeley or Caltech. With ANY other school, you're going to suffer a significant decrease in the value of your degree in foreign countries. Furthermore, international rankings are largely predicated on research output, which should be of little or no concern to an undergraduate, except as an indication of international recognition (this may be what ennisthemenace intended, anyway). And even then, a lack of international recognition would harm alumni from schools like Williams and Amherst far more than it would those from Vanderbilt, and yet both are wonderful schools that routinely steal cross admits from even top ivies. I, personally, would not suggest international recognition as an important factor in this consideration.

makennacompton -- I'm trying very hard to not be disrespectful here, but I'm very seriously doubting your credibility after your statement about the freshman dorms at Vandy. If there is anything wrong with Vandy, it's not the Commons. Many consider the Commons to be THE NICEST freshman dorms in the entire country. They are state-of-the-art and absolutely spacious. There's a reason why Vandy ensures that tours go through the Commons and into an actual Commons dorm.

I'm trying to do very little bashing here, but Duke's freshman housing is just flat-out inferior to the Commons. The fact that Duke, which is located in Durham, would stick some of its freshmen in rooms without air-conditioning is just absurd. Freshmen at Duke also have to take a bus over to main campus for classes. The residence buildings themselves are nice, but I would still give the Commons the edge there.

32.<<<SoCalDad2>>>
[quote]How many Rhodes scholars can Vanderbilt lay claim to? How many students just received a Truman (2 days ago)? How many Kleiner Perkins Fellows were selected from Vandy (Duke had 5)? Where does Vanderbilt rank on Forbes' 'grateful grads' list (Duke was 4th in terms of alumni donations)? CEOs surveyed by the NY Times ranked Duke 13th in the world. Where did Vanderbilt feature on that list? How many NAS members are on Vanderbilt's faculty? How big is Vanderbilt's per capita endowment? How many billionaires has Vanderbilt produced? Has a Vanderbilt grad ever gone on to head Apple? Or GM? Or Cisco? Or Morgan Stanley? Duke grads have.
How many Turing award winners can Vanderbilt stake claim to? Does it have freshly minted Nobel laureates on its faculty? How many Vandy affiliates have gone on to win Nobel prizes in the sciences?
Can Vanderbilt lure the first female president of the International Mathematical Union away from mighty Princeton? What is the average starting salary of a Vandy grad? Are Vanderbilt's professors on the cusp of curing AIDS? Did Vanderbilt faculty members play a pivotal role in discovering the final human chromosome? Did they discover the genetic basis for Alzheimer's (ApoE4)? Did Vanderbilt professors invent ultrasound imaging? Did they come up with the first brain-machine interface? Was the precursor to the world wide web (usenet) developed at Vanderbilt? Does Vanderbilt have more National Merit Scholars than any school outside of HYPSM? Is Vanderbilt the second best feeder to Columbia Business School and Chicago's Booth School of Business? How many students does Vanderbilt place at JHU Med?[/quote]

Of what possible relevance is any of that for a high school senior who is looking for a good college experience?

33.<<<Faline2>>>
Also, most people would agree that Vanderbilt is much more southern than the 'University of New Jersey in Durham'.
Nice! :(
The University of New Jersey in Durham. Supernova, what state do you hail from? People here in Appalachia said that phrase to me-- but they were the same people who thought Duke was a "State U" instead of a private institution. ignorance is bliss. Duke is better understood in other parts of the nation. It is a dynamic, younger great institution in the US.

My husband was raised in NJ so naturally this particular Duke slur always leaves me a bit speechless. Guess I "pass" as southern since I had Virginia parents even though I have lived in 14 different states--so folks in VA and NC will say that sort of thing to me with no screening. They slip up when they hit me up with that zinger. Nothing could be further from the truth by the way about Duke. Duke's endowment also requires that Duke admit a higher percentage of students from North and South Carolina. Perhaps you didn't know this.

Vandy is where Duke was a few years earlier re spread of national/international students being the norm in each class. Despite the lack of air conditioning and the more cramped freshman quarters, Duke son still loved his year on the all freshman brick Trinity College...(perhaps the fourth or fifth incarnation of how Duke makes use of its old Georgian campus, one era it was devoted to housing Duke women) that requires a shuttle bus to get to the Gothic Wonderland.

Back to the OP. If you are dead serious about a career in International Relations, you can get great placements in the very well staffed Vandy in DC program. My Vandy son had an amazing job and it was paid for a full summer through them. However, the Sanford School of Public Policy at Duke is hard core (Vandy does not have anything that mirrors this subschool) and Sanford delivers in world wide placements so take a look at that school as I stated earlier. And take a look at the Gates Foundation at Duke. Duke is also building a campus in China.

pick your emotional IQ fit for four years and if you have a clear pathway academically, research and let what you find out inform your decision.

34.<<<oliver007>>>
People above pointing to "number of Rhodes Scholars", or "number of CEOs" etc should remember that in the aggregate MORE CEOs went to NO NAME schools than ALL of the elite schools put together! That is a nonsensical criterion for undergrad. education. Also, these data hail from history, and VU is an entirely different school than it was even 5 years ago, and discerning people should note that something dynamic is going on at VU, and a transformative phase is underway. Perhaps 20 years ago Duke was regarded as an insular, southern, regional school...an upstart, but is now much better regarded. Same is happening at VU, and as of now, their entering students are of the same caliber as Penn, Duke, Brown, Dartmouth etc. Clinging to past criteria denotes an unwillingness to face up to reality. Look, I went to Duke Medical School, and have great pride in that. I also have a niece at VU now, and have gotten to know the school. Today, I'd pick VU over Duke!

35.<<<oliver007>>>
makenna...thanks for reinforcing my diagnosis! The fact that your opinion is shaped by "every Asian (by the way, do you have a problem with Asian applicants? seems like a thorn in your side) in my school was accepted to VU..."completely vindicates my statement that you "have a spectacularly myopic and addled view of VU". How subjective and parochial! Extrapolating a few instances of personal observation into a broad opinion is the hallmark of the UNscientific method. Where did YOU get educated?

36.<<<oliver007>>>
Go to VU admissions blog and read about the "overall caliber of students" they admit! You are still spewing subjective rubbish, "unburdened by facts", as seems to be your penchant. It is preposterous for anyone to claim that the caliber of students at VU and Duke is not almost exactly similar. Compare the % of students in top 5% of high school class, SAT/ACT scores etc, leadership positions held etc etc. It is hilarious to see you obdurately cling to your comforting illusions.

37.<<<SoCalDad2>>>
[quote]Vandy only chooses based on SAT scores while other schools like Penn and Duke weigh essays and ECs more closely once an applicant reaches a certain threshold with regards to test scores (SAT/ACT/SAT II).[/quote]

SAT scores at Vandy are higher than at Duke, and that does suggest that Duke has a more holistically based admission process. However, I don't see how that fact leads to the conclusion that "Vanderbilt does not enroll the same overall caliber of students as Duke."

38.<<<SoCalDad2>>>
While on the subject of SAT scores: the 25th and 75th percentiles for the Class of 2017 at Vanderbilt are 1410 and 1570 (up from 1250 and 1430 just ten years ago). That is pretty good. However, for engineering they are 1470 and 1600. For comparison, at Caltech they are 1490 and 1600 (entire school). I would suppose that Duke Engineering has similar numbers. This shows that there is very little difference between the academic abilities of students at schools of this caliber.

<url>http://****.com/n4xlmk8</url>
<url>http://engineering.vanderbilt.edu/about/statistics.php</url>

39.<<<timetodecide12>>>
Vanderbilt has quickly closed the gap with Duke, and will very likely surpass Duke in the future. Vanderbilt has all of the intangibles over Duke (e.g. nicer campus, better location, etc). When the gap was wider between the schools, students had the tendency to overlook Dukes unfortunate location of Durham due to prestige. Thankfully, elite students have realized they can have the same top-notch academics, but in a fun and exciting city like Nashville.

40.<<<bud123>>>
All the top universities are holistic and seek to build each class. Academics alone will not get you in the most selective U's. They may place more or less weight in different areas but they all have the luxury of selecting which top academic students they want. Vandy didn't all of the sudden start to care more about SAT's and the other top 20's didn't stop using test scores. So why have the scores skyrocketed at Vandy? Why are more top students selecting Vandy? These things don't randomly just happen. Something great is happening there. High school students should take a close look at VU and see why.

Top students in 2014 are looking at colleges holistically and they have the luxury of selecting which university to attend. Academics alone will not attract the best students. Students today want a university that can offer more than only academics. VU gets it.

41.<<<Confucious2014>>>
Thanks to the **** @alicejohnson aka @supernova123 ( who has been banned again I think) we got some good discussion on this topic. Great comments from @oliver007 and @faline2 both of whom seem to have BOTH duke and Vandy connections

42.<<<Commodore15>>>
ennisthemenace -- I don't think I need to say it, as others before me have already pointed it out, but you have absolutely no way of supporting a statement like that.

What do you hope to gain by posting in this thread? You've failed to effectively substantiate any of your claims. Do you really think any student smart and conscientious enough to be in the position of choosing between schools like Vanderbilt and Duke is going to even consider any of what you've said?

43.<<<Pancaked>>>
@ennisthemenace, you continue to vaguely cite statistics that are based on the Vanderbilt of 5, 10 or 20 years ago. I nor anyone else doubts that Duke was a significantly better school 5, 10, or 20 years ago. Now, the gap is small, and these other statistics will soon catch up with the quality of the new student body. While Duke may maintain a slight edge academically, there are many factors that would make a student pick Vandy over Duke. I think we're all beating a dead horse at this point.

Though I did get a good laugh about the poster mocking Vandy's dorms compared to Duke's. That has to be a joke, right? Either way, I was amused.

44.<<<MommyDearest13>>>
@ennisthemenace "I just don't understand why anyone would pick Vandy over Duke"

My son chose Vandy over Duke. He loved Nashville (and the weather.) He liked the social vibrancy on campus. He liked Vandy's undergrad focus. He liked Vandy's curriculum in his major better. In engineering, Vandy is generous with AP credits which allows one to get a masters in their fourth year. Vandy was less expensive and not qualitatively different. He didn't get caught up in rankings. He chose based on where he wanted to spend 4 years. He had a harder time giving up Carnegie a Mellon SCS since it would definitely open up doors in his field, but the cost would have been too much of a gamble. He had an amazing first year experience...it would not have been the same anywhere else. He is a brilliant kid and feels challenged and average at Vandy. He and his fellow students, like pancaked, are the future alumni base of Vandy. They will leave loving their four years at Vandy and eager to help out future graduates.

Also, S had the option of staying in Nashville this summer and doing research or a nicely paid internship...as a rising sophomore.

45.<<<timetodecide12>>>
In 1992, UPenn had an acceptance rate of 40% and was largely considered the doormat Ivy (less selective than Cornell). The very fact that you are unaware of how rapidly Penn has improved contradicts your argument.

Also, your history of universities is completely skewed. In the 1960s, Vanderbilt and Duke had comparable acceptable rates/test scores. Both schools have ALWAYS been prestigious in the south. However, Duke (likely due to being in the ACC and not the SEC) diversified geographically at a faster rate (having a successful basketball team likely didnt hurt).

However, Vanderbilt is on the same upward trajectory as Duke. The student bodies are comparable and Vanderbilt has been able to attract elite banks/consulting firms on campus. I believe since Vanderbilt is in a much better location, it is destined to surpass Duke.

WashU is not a fair comparison. Duke and Vanderbilt are both in high profile sports conferences which help name recognition. Vanderbilt also has the benefit of being in one of the hottest cities in America.

46.<<<lovingasiandad>>>
I need some help. Daughter accepted into Vandy. Got the Chancellors scholarship. Interested in Pre-med related majors. Has visited Vandy twice. DS is also accepted into Duke. Visited Duke twice. Latest during the BDD weekend. Came back and told me she LOVES Duke. Her reaction was very subdued after the MOSAIC weekend ( no enthusiasm - maybe visiting during the MOSAIC was a mistake). Said something like didn't see Vandy as intellectual ( please don't chide her on this, I know it is not true ) There is no chance of Financial aid from Duke where as Vandy has the National Merit and Chancellor's scholarship. As a dad I am torn between sending to Duke vs Vandy. Based on @pancaked @faline2 and few other stalwarts here i know both are good schools and Vandy being on the uptrend. I can afford to pay for Duke but that also means I will not able to pay for her grad school or med school. My intention was to help her with post grad education. I am in pain trying to decide between Vandy and Duke. If you were in my situation what would you do?. I apologize to OP but I thought since this was Duke Vs Vandy thread I would post it here instead of starting a new thread. Thanks

47.<<<timetodecide12>>>
Here's a NYTimes article that profiled a student choosing between Duke, Vanderbilt, and Yale.

<url>http://thechoice.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/04/30/envelope-greshko-5/</url>

48.<<<Go9ersjrh>>>
@lovingasiandad - Is another trip to Vandy possible? Make appointments to meet with an advisor. Walk the campus and the town one more time. Unfortunately classes are over for the semester otherwise I'd have her do Dore for Day. Have her create the pro's and con's for each school. Since you can send her to Duke financially, it should come down to her decision. She has too excellent choices.

49.<<<Pancaked>>>
That's a tough situation @lovingasiandad . Maybe make a new topic and see if other parents will weigh in.

50.<<<oliver007>>>
Vanderbilt is cheaper than Duke? That is startling news to me! I doubt it. In fact, it is not true at all.

51.<<<oliver007>>>
asiandad: Time to have a mature talk with your daughter! Don't blow the chance to get a cheaper education at VU which is just as good as Duke. She cannot afford the luxury of passing this up and then getting into a financial jam for grad/med school. Believe me, when the teenage fixation with a vaporous aura of a school's "prestige" wears off, she will regret it tremendously if she passes up the scholarship at VU. You need to persuade her constructively! This is not a matter for immature dithering. There should be exactly ZERO indecision on this point. A total no-brainer!

52.<<<oliver007>>>
ennisthemenace: While almost every other poster here argues that VU and Duke are comparable, you alone have the compulsion to resort to hyperbole, and disproportionate statements (in favour of Duke) which do nothing but drain your position of credibility. Duke "blow VU out of the water" in anything??? On what planet? Get a grip! Your views are entertaining and risible, but really, get a grip.

53.<<<oliver007>>>
Perhaps mommydearest's child got financial aid at VU, thus making it "cheaper"?

54.<<<Faline2>>>
loving asian dad, my Vandy son let go of 2 private full pay colleges he felt great affinity with. However, he took a great deal of pride in being a Chancellor's scholar at Vanderbilt all four years. He knew he wanted to go to law school (which could cost 70 grand times three)..post recession, lousy job market, loan payments...he made the decision for Vandy. With gratitude. The whole time he was there he felt wanted, chosen, and encouraged to contribute in a way that fulfilled the promise the committee saw in him when he was in high school. Our flagship college of University of Virginia Law does not consider Vandy son to be financially emancipated till he is over 26. He is working for at least two years. But his pathway is definitely a high loan grad school.

We paid full freight to Duke for our first born. He loved the place, the sports and his friends. In what I refer to jokingly as the "We want to give our son a Pony" mentality, we were a bit delirious. He worked so hard! He was such a trooper! We had such fun touring colleges! in denial re graduate school actual costs.

Our parents had nothing to do with our own graduate degrees. We owed 10 thousand dollars, not 20 times 10 thousand. You hear a lot of people say things like "graduate school is On Them!" Yes, for some pathways. Fellowships in the hard sciences are out there for those who excel. Duke son will work full time and go to night school. But overall, the costs have inflated beyond the understanding of the grandparents or your friends.

Sit down and do the math with your daughter on two or three different med schools, assuming that she can borrow most of the tuition. Calculate the monthly payments. Your girl will need a car, a safe apartment, health insurance, a week or two off here and there, plane tickets, a phone, cable, computers, books.

I am sympathetic to your daughter's being thrilled with her Blue Devil Day lookabout and re being less excited about her Mosaic Weekend. These things can be very ephemeral, and based on the most slight and irrational encounters. Duke son was indifferent to Duke--figured he would not be admitted. When he went to Blue Devil Day he had a negative experience. Pouring rain. The staff in the admissions building seemed a bit frantic. Each other prospie got "picked up" by a host. As darkness fell, a very strange young man appeared (obviously under duress), took him to the shuttle bus and off for an overnight at Duke main campus. He told our son that his frat put his name in to take a Prefrosh as a Joke. Then he dumped our high school senior and said he would be back about three in the morning..didn't even leave him a key to his room. Son wandered off via shuttle to Baldwin on the freshman campus and attended the last Duke Symphony performance of the year. There he observed a community of musicians that would join.
I will never forget how he immediately bonded with the men and women in his freshman dorm, the praise for his teachers...Blue Devil Days forgotten. I believe this phenomenon could work out for your daughter as well if she picks her full tuition offer--ie her lukewarm Mosaic event fading into past experience. I honestly believe that Vanderbilt offers a magnificent premed program with a great overall undergraduate experience.
One of my best friends has a wonderful girl dead set on med school....a real vocation since her teens. Her dream had always been Harvard, and her Harvard visit was her favorite. She was the 1st person from her high school to be admitted there. No aid. She took a full ride to a top LAC. The pressure put on her family to send her to Harvard was intense! by disappointed guidance counselors, well meaning friends, the local Harvard alum who interviewed her. She is a junior in college now and her parents have spent less than 100 dollars. This school is sending her abroad to interview for sought after post-undergrad research jobs. She has a 4.0 in sciences. She went abroad for a semester. She is active in the arts on campus; she has dear friends. Every summer she has paid research jobs. I watched her a month ago taking around the high school senior finalists for her scholarship. What self esteem she has for having paid her own way! Her parents are making plans to find redirect their money to back her in medical school, to help reduce her loan burden. I am sure she will apply to Ivies again. But she may again choose the best med school/plus financial fit. It won't hurt to be the recipient of a full ride on her applications to med school. Your daughter received an offer given to less than 1% of admitted students at Vanderbilt.
Google Curmudgeon on the CC boards. He is an amusing writer and something of an expert on med school applications here. His daughter took a full ride to Rhodes College and turned down Yale undergrad a few years ago. She is currently at Yale Med School but she had many offers of admission to other fine medical schools. Definitely encourage your daughter to read that storyline. Yale Med School is not free tuition, nor was it her least expensive admission. But she was freer to choose due to her undergraduate decision. Regardless, good luck and congrats on her happy April whichever way things shake out.

55.<<<4beardolls>>>
@faline2, thank you for detailing your and other families choice making journeys. DS is currently in the similar position trying to make his decision and your stories are helpful confirmation for us.

56.<<<lovingasiandad>>>
Thank you folks. Your personal experiences help a lot. @oliver007 Appreciate your input given that you have been to both Vandy and Duke. The cost of attendance difference between Vandy and Duke is about $44K/year and the increase will grow yearly given that she has a Vandy Chancellor's scholarship and Duke's avg tuition increases of 4%. @4beardolls - what other school is DS considering.

57.<<<lovingasiandad>>>
I am unable to debate Duke vs Vandy on prestige/reputation/intellectualism/location etc but if you are trying to be a doctor does it even make sense to sink money for an undergrad school ( similar to Vandy ) when it can be used for medical school. Do people in medical profession discuss reputations of the undergrad schools they went to ?

58.<<<Faline2>>>
It is my opinion that med schools would have a greater respect for a student who accepted 44 plus grand a year tuition at a place where premed is taught magnificently (as it is at Vanderbilt)-- in order to be able to underwrite to any med school he/she desired with strong ability to pay off the debt that accumulates each semester in med school. For instance, when she applies to Duke Medical School among others, she can state she had a hard time turning down that admission but embraced her scholarship at Vanderbilt with gratitude, but would like to have her second time around life at Duke.
When you are already recipient of a rare merit scholarship, you have a bit of a leg up on applications for other opportunities through-out your four years and beyond. Confidence in oneself, the ability to see the long view of a medical education and the ability to weigh the welfare of one's family... if their resources are finite....is one way to measure character. I think that med schools seek MCAT scores plus people of strong character and grit.
One thing I enjoyed watching online was the White Coat ceremonies at Duke Med, Wash U Med, and at Vandy Med where our sons have friends now. Parents are invited, and since a picture/video says a thousand words, these are the sorts of images that might help you visualize re keeping "your eyes on the prize". Look at where honor graduates of Vanderbilt end up at med schools. And watch this white coat ceremony..skip forward to see each student in a new class at Vanderbilt Med School introduced. Then you and your daughter will have a better idea at how diverse the students are who make it into top medical schools--some from undergrad schools that are not top ranked, but students who have very impressive letters of reference, undergrad research experience, top grades, and top MCATs and evidence of character and vocation.
By the way, the obvious warmth and supportive atmosphere at this ceremony at Vanderbilt Med School is very similar to the undergraduate school.
<url>http://mediasite.vanderbilt.edu/Mediasite/Play/473d924c492346b7af672e543ff34d801d</url>

59.<<<fondmemories>>>
@faline2 "Confidence in oneself, the ability to see the long view of a medical education and the ability to weigh the welfare of one's family... if their resources are finite....is one way to measure character."

So well said!

60.<<<oliver007>>>
asiandad: I am a doctor. Doctors don't give a damn where other doctors went to college. It barely matters where one went to Med School after a while. What matters forever is where you do your RESIDENCY/FELLOWSHIP, since that is where your actual practical skills are acquired, and that is where you form permanent alliances with others in the same specialty. If you or your daughter spend more than a nanosecond in making the choice between VU/Chancellor Scholarship and Duke, I am afraid you will deserve the regret that descends upon you when Med school expenses make themselves felt. Do you know that a large number of VU students just plain turn Duke down every year, and here you are vacillating over a ridiculously obvious choice??!! If resources are not unlimited for you, it would, in my opinion, be unconscionable for a child to not gratefully, humbly, and gleefully JUMP on the Vanderbilt offer!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! This really is a ridiculous no-brainer which for some reason is being allowed to rise to the level of a "dilemma" here.

61.<<<doubleeternity>>>
Oliver, you are absolutely right there. I am a PhD and work in academia. I can tell you that the place of undergraduate education really does not mean anything in this part of the world. I am sure only the last place of your education/training matters in the post-undergraduate level. I know there are kids who weigh between a Vandy merit scholarship and HYP. But Vandy Chancellor Scholar and Duke? Give me a break, please. I am sorry but I just do not get asiandad family's issue.

62.<<<thecoldeye>>>
I am not a doctor. I am not a Phd. I am not even a loving Asian dad. I am only a 54 year old businessman, and here is what I know: $44 grand a year delta for four years is a pile of money especially if you are paying with after tax money.

Have you explained to your child what you have to earn in order to save $44 grand? It is time to introduce your child to an adult world where bites are taken out of your paycheck for taxes, and food, and insurance, and the mortgage and that repair bill for your daughter's violin bow (come on, admit it, your daughter plays at least one musical instrument). These bites out of the paycheck are only concepts our children hear about on the news. They have no idea that these things are real.

My daughter (a newly minted William &amp; Mary Econ grad) has twice my IQ and a GREAT job and she still thinks driving involves little more than paying for gas. I have done a bad job in this respect because I have some kind of delusional need to keep her as an ignorant child. Dad's protection was good for her when she was 12. It is bad for her now. I have some catching up to do.

I encourage loving Asian Dad to ask "what if"? There is a saying in my business world: when in doubt, remain flexible. You what to know what flexible is? How about having that $176 grand in your pocket four years from now? Things will change. It is at least 1% possible that she will want to go to grad school for painting in Italy in lieu of medical school. Anything could happen and when it does, I can promise that having that $176,000 will be a good thing.

63.<<<SoCalDad2>>>
^^^ You gotta be kidding! Did you learn this type of "statistical analysis" at Duke?

64.<<<bud123>>>
Both Vanderbilt and Duke are elite universities. There are 3,700 colleges/universities in the US. Only 15 are in the top 20 USNRW and AWR and Vandy and Duke are 2 of those elite 15. If your plan is to become a physician it doesn't matter where you take organic chemistry. There is zero "premium" for pre-meds in selecting one of these over the other. Medicare and Obamacare will reimburse you the same amount no matter what your student loans look like.
Since Vandy is offering you a scholarship go to Vandy. If Duke offered you a full ride and Vandy would cost you an extra $176K I would recommend you go to Duke.
As for grad/med school I believe about 40% of Vandy students go and 71% are accepted into their first choice.

65.<<<SoCalDad2>>>
[quote]Vanderbilt is not an elite school. Duke is. Go to Duke if you can afford to. The education you receive will be worth the premium.[/quote]

Why is the education "worth the premium"? Teachers are more knowledgeable? Teachers are more entertaining? Textbooks are better? Library has more books? Something in the water causes students to learn more?

Inquiring minds want to know!

66.<<<Faline2>>>
MandarinChang, are you a current Duke student? Tell us, are you paying full Duke tuition and fees freight of $61,404, and did you turn down a full merit tuition worth (176,000 dollars) at a top 20 university? If you are receiving financial need aid at very generous Duke University, your situation has no bearing on the choice of the original poster, who falls into the category of families at private institutions who will get zero need aid and can only compete for rare merit offers. By the way, my Duke graduate has tremendous respect/love for Vanderbilt, his brother's alma mater. He would think your assessment of the overall inferiority of a Vanderbilt education to be "hilarious."

67.<<<oliver007>>>
looks like mandarinchang needs a cephalo-colonic disengagement. Bizarre and uneducated opinions.

68.<<<oliver007>>>
ennisthemenace has successfully disqualified from any serious consideration of his opinions! Pretty shabby quality of "evidence" to support his unsupportable views. Actually quite laughable.

69.<<<doubleeternity>>>
I hope MadarinChang is not a real Dukie and not even a real Madarin. Duke is a noble school and the Chinese are noble people. If rogues like MandarinChang is any part of Duke, that school is really doomed.

70.<<<lovingasiandad>>>
I have been a loving dad but not a good dad in explaining the value of $$ to my kids even though I do know the value of money. @thecoldeye @oliver007 @faline2 you guys hit it out of the park. I learnt a good lesson in parenting. Need to work on this for my second kid. btw, I didn't even have to explain all this to DD, I just showed her this thread and Duke thread. @thecoldeye @oliver007 request you guys to post more on CC ( like @faline2) and impart your wisdom. Thank you so much

71.<<<Faline2>>>
Our kids--your kid, lovingasiandad- are very honorable young people because of their outstanding work ethics and they have most definitely taken on some of the best of the values of their parents, teachers and other mentors they have been around in their most tender years. But they are works in progress. Their frontal lobes aren't finished. Everyone, even middle aged people with aging, complete, brains--indulges in fantastical thinking. Which is why I refer to Duke as "we gave our son a Pony." (something all little girls in the sixties asked their parents for) I asked for a white pony with brown spots every year of my girlhood despite the fact that we lived in military housing and moved every 18 months. Despite the disappointment of no Pony, I did grow up stronger from moving from one part of the US to another region regularly.

This has become a joke among my friends...as frankly the Fantastical Thinking lapses re how to fund our children's higher education-- begins with parental fantastical thinking, not the 18 year old.

I speak as a parent who would like to do more for our sons, and for our honorable first born child, pre-recession, we just closed our eyes and let him choose among the jewels where he received admittance. We also ended up with a second mortgage after Duke, declining home valuation after the recession, a decline in the financial markets that affected job opportunities for all Econ graduates (not just our Dukie) and to live to tell Duke son we are unable to help him with graduate school. (We could have --if he had taken his Echols at UVA or his honors admission to William and Mary.) But...we bought him a Pony.

Graduate school for a future MBA is not as critical for someone in the medical fields because they really want you to work for 4-6 years with your undergrad degree first. Duke son has an interesting job in a major city and will start taking MBA classes in an evening program while working full time. He has already replaced the used car we helped him get on his own. He walks like a young man who can pay his own way..and he has-- for five years already. He really can't afford to give up his job because it has great potential and is a great match for him so...night school it is! There were times when his fellow Dukies were going to grad school on their parents' dime that he felt a little forlorn but I think he garners respect in his workplace because he has achieved financial independence.
We still have our Chancellor Scholar at Vandy's graduate loans to stare down and strategize over.

Your daughter is honorable, just as our sons are honorable. But just like in earlier phases of parenting...it is a form of child neglect not to teach them the realities of this world. Our Vandy grad is one of the most earnest, honest, hard-working 23 year olds you will ever meet and he has a very modest paying job in a desirable place. He is paying all his bills except his car payment! We have asked him to look at his income and to evaluate what he would have to do to take over the last year of payments on his car. He looked....Astonished! It's not that he is a selfish entitled person---he often had little paid jobs around town....but he has had his head stuck in books for 23 years. His income won't allow for him to pay for his vehicle. I am glad he is starting to realize what financial autonomy requires. If he waited tables on weekends, he might be able to close the gap re the car payments...see where I am heading? By the time he gets to graduate school, he will be so anxious to be autonomous that we think he will be doing all the math on his own.
autonomy feels good! I remember being 23 and receiving nothing from my parents. each one of these hard working kids has a path that may take longer or may take deep strategizing, but the goal is autonomy. So sad! My friends and I live for Skypes a couple of times a month now. ha.
anyway, enough rambling for this morning.

72.<<<thecoldeye>>>
AsianDad,
From the people at US Census, here is a little data point to put the Vandy/Duke delta of $44,000 per year in perspective: the average retirement savings for an American age 50 is . . . .$44,000. See article: <url>http://www.statisticbrain.com/retirement-statistics/</url>

I have no opinion as to which school is better. Both are great schools, and both could be a perfect fit or a complete disaster for your child. You cannot tell in advance. If you can develop a statistically validated algorithm to predict school "fit" in marginal cases, please invite me to become an early investor in your firm.

Your daughter is sincere when she says she wants to be a physician. I believe her. I also believe that she does not know what she is talking about. In just my circle of friends, I know physicians who do not want to be physicians. These people went through med school and training with (compared to your daughter) an informed belief that medicine was for them. They were wrong. Is it possible that your 18 year old could be wrong? Yes. Given this uncertainty, I say it is best to maintain the options that having $176,000 brings.

I think about my dermatologist. She has THREE unrelated Board Certs! Because she took advantage of undergrad and med school scholarships, her father had a pile of money to support her as she worked through one specialty after another. That was nice. Options are good--keep them if you can.

I respect your daughter's hard work and character (and I hope she respects yours). I have EVIDENCE that your daughter is very good at "getting the grade" in school and on standardized tests. I have evidence of nothing else. We and she really have no idea what she will want to do with her life. We only know what this 18 year old says. Consider the possibility (probability) that she does not know what she is talking about. With all of this doubt, keep the money.

73.<<<Pancaked>>>
I read the replies to @lovingasiandad's topic on the Duke forum-- all of the posters spoke very highly of Vanderbilt and were extremely levelheaded! It's strange that the posters wanting to paint Vandy as scum compared to Duke came to Vandy's forum to do it...

74.<<<Penn95>>>
@commodore15 It is a big misconception that employers target only wharton kids and the rest get overlooked. this seems to be what some people outisde penn think but any penn student will tell you it is not the case. Obviously there are fewer students ending up in "business jobs" from Penn CAS and SEAS but this is because many of these students are interested in grad school abd not going into business. Penn CAS and SEAS students have an great rate of success in getting business jobs. the great thing about penn is that it is the nimber one target school for firms because of its preprofessional culture(which is largely due to wharton) but recruiting opportunitites sre open to everyone and non-wharton students are in no disadvantage at all.

Also Penns yield for the class of 2018 was 66%, so nowhere near the 41.5% of Vandy or 47.8% of Duke. For the class of 2017 penns yield was 64.3% while Vandy's was 40.7% and Duke's was 45.5. So while Duke and Vandy might be "in the same range" as you say, Penn is definitely not.

75.<<<Pancaked>>>
@Penn95 Yield is kind of a silly statistic to compare. There are so many more factors that go into yield than the quality of the institution. This is like saying Georgia Southern and University of Nevada are in the same league as Penn because they have yields in the 60s.

Anyways, this topic is months old and I don't think the OP is still weighing his/her options.

76.<<<MBVLoveless>>>
@Penn95: Keep stroking your non-Wharton Penn ego. All three schools are equally elite, and the yield statistics you cite mean little. Let's look at yield from a different, more direct perspective:

Penn vs. Vanderbilt:
46% Vandy, 54% Penn (even matchup)
<url>http://www.parchment.com/c/college/tools/college-cross-admit-comparison.php?compare=vanderbilt&amp;with=University+of+Pennsylvania</url>

Penn vs. Duke
52% Duke, 48% Penn (even matchup)
<url>http://www.parchment.com/c/college/tools/college-cross-admit-comparison.php?compare=Duke+University&amp;with=University+of+Pennsylvania</url>

